The last term we're going to look at is the
term 'C' and it represents the Coriolis and
Centripetal torques that exists within a serial
link robot manipulator. It's often called
the velocity term because the C matrix multiplies
the vector Q dot, the vector of joint velocities.
This is the torque that is due to gyroscopic
effects due to rotating joints within the
robot manipulator. There are actually two
effects that are modelled by the matrix C and
it's the Coriolis effect which is named after
the French scientist, mathematician Coriolis
and he did a lot of work on understanding
what goes on in rotating reference frames
and the other force represented by the matrix
C are centripetal torques.
Once again we have our two link robot represented
symbolically and this time we're going to
investigate the Coriolis and centripetal torques.
And that's done using the method called coriolis
and the arguments to that are the joint angles,
there they are and the joint velocities; Q1D and Q2D.
It takes a moment to compute and this is the
Coriolis and centripetal matrix.
It's a 2 x 2 matrix and we can see, once again that
it comprises a number of kinematic and dynamic
parameters of a robot and we can also see
that it's a function of the configuration
of a robot. Interestingly, in this case it’s
only a function of Q2.
For a simple 2 link robot manipulator, the
C matrix looks something like this. We can
see that the elements are a function of the
joint angle, in this case just a single joint
angle. Joint 2 angle Q2 and also the velocities
of the two joints Q1 dot and Q2 dot.
Now the torque, due to the Coriolis and centripetal
effects can be derived by multiplying the
matrix C by the vector of joint velocities
and if we expand that out, we have the expression
for the Coriolis and centripetal talks acting
on Joint 1 and acting on Joint 2.
Let's consider the case where Joint 1 is not
moving that’s Q1 dot is equal to zero but
let's say that Joint 2 is moving so Q2 dot
is not equal to zero. Then although this term
here is equal to zero. This term here will
be finite, that is the motion of Joint 2 at
constant velocity is going to induce a torque
on Joint 1 and that's again something that
the Joint 1 motion controller is going to
have to fight against, going to have to oppose
in order to keep Joint 1 stationary.
And similarly we can see that for Joint 2
constant velocity motion of Joint 1 is going
to induce a Coriolis and centripetal effect
on Joint 2. Now if we look at these terms,
we can see that some of them are a function
of a particular joint velocity squared and
these are the centripetal talks and some of
them are a product of one joint velocity multiplied
by a different joint velocity and these are
the Coriolis terms. So this matrix C has got
some terms which are the products of velocities
of different joints and some are joint velocity
squared, Coriolis and centripetal effects.